---
layout: post
title: "Algebra II Other Modules"
date: 2026-01-03 00:00:00 +0800
permalink: /posts/algebra2/
tags: algebra
use_math: true
---

# Other Modules

## Polynomial rings in several variables

::: theorem
Let $V$ be a finitely generated module over the polynomial ring $\mathbb{C}[x_1,\ldots,x_k]$, and let $A$ be an $m\times n$ presentation matrix for $V$. Denote by $A(c)$ the evaluation of $A$ at a point $c$ of $\mathbb{C}^k$. Then $V$ is a free module of rank $r$ iff the matrix $A(c)$ has rank $m-r$.
:::

## Integral element

Recall $\alpha\in\mathbb{C}$ is called an algebraic integer, if $\alpha^n+a_{n-1} \alpha^{n-1}+\cdots+a_1\alpha+a_0=0$. And $\alpha,\beta$ algebraic integer $\implies$ $\alpha \pm \beta, \alpha \beta$ algebraic integer.

let $\mathbb{Z}[\alpha]\subset \mathbb{C}$ be the subring generated by $\alpha$

If $\alpha$ is an algebraic integer, then $\mathbb{Z}[\alpha]$ (as a $\mathbb{Z}$-module) is finitely generated

::: lemma
$A\to B$ be a ring homomorphism. $V$ be a $B$-module. If $B$, as an $A$-module, is f.g., and $V$ is a f.g. $B$-module then $V$ is also a f.g. $A$-module.
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* generator $b_1,\ldots,b_m$ of $B$ as $A$-module. generator $v_1,\ldots,v_n$ of $V$ as $B$-module.

[Claim]{.underline} $\{b_i v_j\}_{1\le i\le m,1\le j \le n}$ generates $V$ as an $A$-module. ◻
:::

::: definition
$A\subset B$ a subring of $B$, $b\in B$ is **integral** over $A$. if $\exists n$, and $\exists a_0,a_1,\ldots,a_{n-1}\in A$, s.t. $$b^n+a_{n-1}b^{n-1}+\cdots+a_1 b+a_0 = 0$$ Say $B$ is integral over $A$ if every $b\in B$ is integral over $A$.
:::

::: proposition
For $b\in B$, TFAE

(1) $b$ is integral over $A$.

(2) subring $A[b]\subset B$ is a finitely generated $A$-module.

(3) $\exists C\subset B$ s.t. $A[b]\subset C$ and $C$ is finitely generated $A$-module.
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* (1) $\implies$ (2). $A[b]$ can be generated by $b^{n-1},\ldots, b^1, 1$.

\(2\) $\implies$ (3). Trivial.

\(3\) $\implies$ (1). Take generators $c_1,\ldots,c_n$ of $C$ as an $A$-module. $b c_i\in C\implies b\cdot c_i= a_{i1}c_1+\cdots+a_{in}c_n$, $\exists a_{ij}\in A$.

$$b \left(\begin{matrix} c_1 \\ c_2 \\ \vdots \\ c_n \end{matrix}\right)
        = (a_{ij})_{n\times n} \left(\begin{matrix} c_1 \\ c_2 \\ \vdots \\ c_n \end{matrix}\right)$$

set $X:=b I_n - (a_{ij})\in M_n(A[b])$

By linear algebra, $\exists Y$, s.t. $Y\cdot X = \det(X) I_n$. Then $$\det(X) \left(\begin{matrix} c_1 \\ c_2 \\ \vdots \\ c_n \end{matrix}\right) = Y \cdot X \left(\begin{matrix} c_1 \\ c_2 \\ \vdots \\ c_n \end{matrix}\right) = \left(\begin{matrix} 0 \\ 0 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \end{matrix}\right)$$ thus $\det(B)=0$ which is a polynomial of $b$ with coefficients in $A$. ◻
:::

::: lemma
If $b_1,\ldots,b_r\in B$ are integral over $A$ then the subring $A[b_1,\ldots,b_r]$ is f.g. as $A$-module.
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* Denote $A_r := A[b_1,\ldots,b_r]$. We apply induction on $r$. If $A_{r-1}\supset A$ is f.g. $A$-module, then $b_r$ is integral over $A_{r-1}$, thus $A_{r-1}[b_r]=A_r$ is f.g. $A_r$-module. But since $A_{r-1}$ is finitely generated $A$ module then $A_r$ is finitely generated $A$-module. ◻
:::

::: corollary
$b,b'\in B$ are integral over $A$ $\implies$ $b\pm b',b b'$are integral over A
:::

::: corollary
$A\subset B \subset C$. If $B$ is integral over $A$, $c\in C$ is integral over $B$, then $c$ is integral over $A$.
:::

::: definition
$$\{b\in B:\text{ integral over } A\}$$ is a subring of $B$ by corollary, call this by **integral closure** of $A$ in $B$.
:::

::: definition
An integral domain $A$ is called **integrally closed** if int closure of $A$ in $\mathrm{Frac} A$ is $A$.
:::

::: definition
A is called a **Dedekind domain** if $A$ is an integrally closed integral domain, s.t. $A$ is noetherian and every nonzero prime ideal is maximal.
:::

::: proposition
1.  $O_k$ above is a Dedekind domain.

2.  In Dedekind domain, every nonzero ideal $=\mathfrak{p}_1^{e_1}\cdots \mathfrak{p_r}^{e_r}$ where $\mathfrak{p}_1^{e_1},\ldots, \mathfrak{p_r}^{e_r}$ maximal ideals.
:::

## homomorphism and exact sequence

Introduction to homological algebra.

Let $R$ be a ring, $V,W$ be $R$-modules.

$\hom_R(V,W)=\{f:V\to W:R-\text{linear map}\}$ this is an $R$-module by

$(f+g)(v):= f(v)+g(v)$ and $(a\cdot f)(v) = a f(v),a\in R$

::: definition
Consider a chain of $R$-linear maps. $$\cdots \to V_{i-1}\xrightarrow{f_{i-1}}V_i \xrightarrow{f_i}V_{i+1} \to \cdots$$ Say this is exact at $V_i$ if $\im f_{i-1} = \ker f_i$ exact if exact at any $V_i$.
:::

::: example
(a) $0\to V \xrightarrow{f} W$ is exact. $\implies$ $f$ is injective.

(b) $V\xrightarrow{g} W \to 0$ is exact. $\implies$ $f$ is surjective.

(c) $0\to V' \xrightarrow{f} V \xrightarrow{g} V'' \to 0$ is exact: $f$ is injective, $g$ is surjective, $\im f = \ker g$ (i.e. $V/V' \simeq V''$)
:::

::: proposition
(1) $$0\to W' \to W \to W''$$ is exact $\iff$ $\forall V$ be $R$-module, $$0\to \hom(V,W')\xrightarrow{F} \hom(V,W) \xrightarrow{G} \hom(V,W'')$$ is exact.

(2) $$V'\to V\to V''\to 0$$ is exact $\iff$ $\forall W$ be $R$-module $$0\to \hom(V'',W)\to \hom(V,W')\to \hom(V',W)$$ is exact.
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* ($\implies$) need to show $F$ injective and $\im F = \ker G$.

[$F$ injective.]{.underline}

Assume $\varphi:V\to W'$ s.t. $F(\varphi)=(V\xrightarrow{\varphi}W'\xleftrightarrow[\text{inj}]{f} W)=0$, so $\im (f\circ \varphi) =0$ $\xrightarrow{f \text{ injective}}$ $\im \varphi =0$, i.e. $\varphi=0$.

$\underline{\im F\subset \ker G}$: Take $\varphi:V\to W'$,

$G(F(\varphi)): V\to W''$ is $V \xrightarrow{\varphi} W' \xrightarrow{f} W \xrightarrow{g} W''$ is zero map.

$\underline{\ker G \subset \im F}$: Take $\psi: V\to W$ s.t. $G(\psi) = 0$ $\implies$ $\im \psi \subset \ker g = \im f$.

So $\psi$ is $$V\xrightarrow{\exists \varphi} W' \xhookrightarrow{f} W$$ i.e. $\psi = f\circ \varphi=F(\varphi)$ so $\psi \in \im F$ ◻
:::

## Tensor product

::: definition
$U,V,W$ be $R$-modules. map $U\times V\xrightarrow{F} W$ is **$R$-bilinear** if $$F(a u_1+b u_2,v)=a F(u_1,v)+ b F(u_2,v)$$ $$F(u,c v_1+ d v_2) = c F(u,v_1)+ d F(u,v_2)$$ $\forall a,b,c,d\in R,u,u_1,u_2\in V,v,v_1,v_2\in V$.

In other words $\forall u\in U, V\to W:v\mapsto F(u,v)$ is $R$-linear; $\forall$
:::

In other words, $F$ is uniquely determined by $F(u_1,v_1),F(u_1,v_2)$

more generally, $F:K^m\times K^m\to W$ $R$-bilinear is uniquely determined by $mn$ elements $F(e_i,e_j)\in W,1\le i \le m,1\le j\le n$.

::: proposition
$\forall U,V$ be $R$-modules.$\exists$ $R$-module $X$ and $\exists U\times V\xrightarrow{F} X$ be $R$-bilinear map s.t. $\forall W$ be $R$-module, $\forall U\times V\xrightarrow{G} W$ be $R$-bilinear map. $\exists$! $R$-linear $g:X\to W$ with $g\circ F=G$. Moreover pair $(X,F)$ is unique up to unique isomorphism.

Write $(U\otimes_R V,U\times V\to U\otimes V)$ with $(u,v)\mapsto u\otimes v$.


<script type="text/tikz">
    \begin{tikzcd}
        {U\times V} & W \\
        {U\otimes_R V}
        \arrow["{\forall R\text{-bilinear} }", from=1-1, to=1-2]
        \arrow[from=1-1, to=2-1]
        \arrow["{\exists! g \text{ R-linear}}"', dashed, from=2-1, to=1-2]
    \end{tikzcd}
</script>

:::

::: proposition
(1) $R\otimes_R V\simeq V$

(2) $V\otimes W\simeq W\otimes V$

(3) $(U\oplus V)\otimes W\simeq (U\otimes W)\oplus (V\otimes W)$

(4) $(U\otimes V)\otimes W = U \otimes (V\otimes W)$
:::

::: proof
*Proof.*

1.  $R\otimes_R V$

2.  

 ◻
:::

::: proposition
$$\hom(U\otimes V,W)\simeq \hom(U,\hom(V,W))$$
:::

::: proposition
If $W'\to W\to W'' \to 0$ is exact then $V\otimes W'\to V\otimes W \to V\otimes W'' \to 0$ is exact $\forall V$.
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* Take any $R$-module $U$ ◻
:::

::: definition
$R\to R'$ be ring homomorphism. For an $R$-module $V$, $R'\otimes_R V$ becomes an $R'$-module by $a'(b'\otimes v) = (a'b') \otimes v$ (scaler extension) $R\to R',R\to R''$ be ring homomorphism, $R'\otimes_R R''$ becomes an $R$-algebra with $R\to R'\otimes_R R',a\mapsto$
:::

::: proposition
$$R/I\otimes V \simeq V/IV$$ $$R/I \times_R R/J = R/ (I+J)$$
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* $$I \to R \to R/I \to 0$$ exact. $$\implies I\otimes V\to R\otimes V \to R/I \otimes V \to 0$$ exact.

$$\im(I\otimes V\to R\otimes V \simeq V) = IV$$ thus $$R/I \otimes V \simeq V/(IV)$$ ◻
:::

::: proposition
$$R/ I \otimes_R R' = R'/I R'$$ $$R[x]\otimes_R R' = R'[x]$$
:::

::: proposition
$R\to R'$ be $R$-algebra. $U=R'$, then $R'\otimes_R V$ becomes an $R'$-module by $a'(\sum b_i' \otimes v_i) = \sum a' b_i' \otimes v_i$
:::

::: proposition

<script type="text/tikz">
    \begin{tikzcd}
        V \\
        & {W'} \\
        {R'\otimes_R V}
        \arrow["{\forall R\text{-lin} }", from=1-1, to=2-2]
        \arrow["{R\text{-lin}}"', from=1-1, to=3-1]
        \arrow["{\exists! g \text{ R-lin}}"', dashed, from=3-1, to=2-2]
    \end{tikzcd}
</script>
 where $V=R\otimes_R V \to R'\otimes_R V$ be $R$-linear map $v= 1\otimes v \mapsto 1\otimes v$. $$\hom_{\text{R-lin}}(V,W') = \hom_{\text{R'-lin}} (R'\otimes_R V,W')$$
:::

::: proposition
$R\xrightarrow{f'} R'$,$R\xrightarrow{f''} R''$, then $R' \otimes_R R''$ becomes an $R$-algebra. $$(\sum_i a_i'\otimes b_i'')\cdot (\sum_j c_j' \otimes d_j'') = \sum_{i,j} (a_i' c_j') \otimes (b_i'' d_j'')$$ $R\to R'\otimes_R R''$ and $a\mapsto a\otimes 1 = a(1\otimes 1) = 1\otimes a$.
:::

::: proposition

<script type="text/tikz">
    \begin{tikzcd}
        & {R'} \\
        \\
        R & {R'\otimes R''} && T \\
        \\
        & {R''}
        \arrow["{x'\mapsto x'\otimes 1}", from=1-2, to=3-2]
        \arrow["{\forall g'}", from=1-2, to=3-4]
        \arrow["{f'}"', from=3-1, to=1-2]
        \arrow["{f''}", from=3-1, to=5-2]
        \arrow["{\exists! \text{ring hom}}", dashed, from=3-2, to=3-4]
        \arrow["{y'\mapsto 1\otimes y''}"', from=5-2, to=3-2]
        \arrow["{\forall g''}"', from=5-2, to=3-4]
    \end{tikzcd}
</script>

:::

::: example
$$R'\otimes_R R[x] \cong R'[x]$$
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* check universality for $R''=R[x]$. ◻
:::
